README.md, before:

# DBT + Airflow + SQL Server DataOps Project

![DBT CI](https://github.com/baduyne/dbt-airflow-dataops/workflows/DBT%20CI%20Pipeline/badge.svg)
![Python Quality](https://github.com/baduyne/dbt-airflow-dataops/workflows/Python%20Code%20Quality/badge.svg)


# DBT and Airflow Data Pipeline Project

## Project Overview
This project implements an automated data transformation pipeline using DBT (Data Build Tool) and Apache Airflow. The pipeline extracts data from SQL Server, transforms it using DBT models, and loads it into a target database, following modern data engineering best practices.

### Architecture Overview
```
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│  SQL Server │ ──► │    DBT     │ ──► │  Target DB  │
└─────────────┘     └─────────────┘     └─────────────┘
        ▲                  ▲                   ▲
        └──────────┬──────┴───────────┬───────┘
                   │                   │
            ┌──────┴───────┐    ┌─────┴──────┐
            │   Airflow    │    │  Docker    │
            └──────────────┘    └────────────┘
```

## Prerequisites
- Docker and Docker Compose
- Git
- Basic understanding of SQL, DBT, and Airflow
- Access to source SQL Server database

## Project Structure and Components

```
dbt_airflow_project/
├── airflow/
│   ├── dags/                  # Contains Airflow DAG definitions
│   │   └── dbt_dag.py        # DAG that orchestrates DBT transformations
│   └── logs/                  # Airflow execution logs
├── dbt/
│   ├── models/               # Contains all DBT data models
│   │   ├── staging/         # First layer: Raw data cleaning and standardization
│   │   │   ├── stg_sales_orders.sql    # Example staging model
│   │   │   └── schema.yml              # Model tests and documentation
│   │   └── marts/           # Final layer: Business-level transformations
│   ├── dbt_project.yml      # DBT project configurations
│   ├── packages.yml         # External DBT package dependencies
│   └── profiles.yml         # Database connection profiles
└── docker-compose.yml       # Container orchestration configuration
```

### Component Details

#### 1. Airflow Components
- **dags/**:
  - Purpose: Stores Airflow DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) definitions
  - Contents: Python files defining workflow orchestration
  - Key File: `dbt_dag.py` - Orchestrates the DBT transformation pipeline
  - Usage: Schedules and monitors DBT model runs and tests

- **logs/**:
  - Purpose: Contains Airflow execution logs
  - Usage: Debugging and monitoring task execution
  - Retention: Typically keeps logs for last 30 days

#### 2. DBT Components
- **models/staging/**:
  - Purpose: First layer of transformation
  - Contents: SQL models that clean and standardize raw data
  - Example: `stg_sales_orders.sql` combines and standardizes sales order tables
  - Materialization: Usually materialized as views for flexibility

- **models/marts/**:
  - Purpose: Final transformation layer
  - Contents: Business-level transformations ready for reporting
  - Materialization: Usually materialized as tables for performance
  - Usage: Direct connection to BI tools

- **dbt_project.yml**:
  - Purpose: DBT project configuration
  - Contents:
    - Project name and version
    - Model configurations
    - Materialization settings
    - Custom macro configurations

- **packages.yml**:
  - Purpose: Manages external DBT packages
  - Current Packages:
    - dbt-utils: Provides additional SQL macros and functions
  - Usage: Install packages using `dbt deps`

- **profiles.yml**:
  - Purpose: Database connection configuration
  - Contents:
    - Connection credentials
    - Target database settings
    - Environment-specific configurations

#### 3. Docker Components
- **docker-compose.yml**:
  - Purpose: Container orchestration
  - Services Defined:
    1. **airflow-webserver**: Web interface for Airflow
       - Port: 8080
       - Usage: Monitor and manage DAGs

    2. **airflow-scheduler**: Airflow task scheduler
       - Purpose: Executes DAGs based on schedule
       - Dependencies: PostgreSQL for metadata

    3. **postgres**: Airflow metadata database
       - Purpose: Stores Airflow state and history
       - Port: 5432

    4. **sqlserver**: Source database
       - Purpose: Stores raw data
       - Port: 1433
       - Database: AdventureWorks

    5. **dbt**: DBT transformation container
       - Purpose: Executes DBT commands
       - Mounts: ./dbt directory for access to models

### Removed Components
The following components from the original structure were removed as they weren't essential:
- `dbt/tests/` - Tests are now included in schema.yml files
- `dbt/macros/` - Using standard macros from dbt_utils package
- `dbt/intermediate/` - Using two-layer (staging/marts) architecture
- `docker/airflow/` and `docker/dbt/` - Docker configurations included in main docker-compose.yml

## Container Workflow
1. **Data Flow**:
   ```
   SQL Server (source) → DBT (transformation) → SQL Server (transformed)
   ```

2. **Process Flow**:
   ```
   Airflow Scheduler → Triggers DBT Container → Runs Models → Updates Status
   ```

3. **Monitoring Flow**:
   ```
   Airflow UI → View Logs → Check Task Status → Monitor Transformations
   ```

## Step-by-Step Implementation Guide

### 1. Initial Setup

1.1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd dbt_airflow_project
```

1.2. Create necessary directories:
```bash
mkdir -p airflow/dags airflow/logs dbt/models/{staging,intermediate,marts}
```

### 2. Docker Configuration

2.1. Create `docker-compose.yml` with the following services:
- Airflow Webserver
- Airflow Scheduler
- PostgreSQL (Airflow metadata database)
- SQL Server (Source database)
- DBT container

2.2. Build custom Docker images:
```bash
docker-compose build
```

### 3. DBT Configuration

3.1. Configure DBT project (`dbt_project.yml`):
```yaml
name: 'dbt_sqlserver_project'
version: '1.0.0'
config-version: 2
profile: 'default'

model-paths: ["models"]
test-paths: ["tests"]
macro-paths: ["macros"]

target-path: "target"
clean-targets:
    - "target"
    - "dbt_packages"
    - "logs"

models:
  dbt_sqlserver_project:
    staging:
      materialized: view
    intermediate:
      materialized: table
    marts:
      materialized: table
```

3.2. Configure DBT profiles (`profiles.yml`):
```yaml
default:
  target: dev
  outputs:
    dev:
      type: sqlserver
      driver: 'ODBC Driver 17 for SQL Server'
      server: sqlserver
      port: 1433
      database: AdventureWorks
      schema: dbo
      user: sa
      password: YourStrong@Passw0rd
      threads: 4
```

3.3. Install DBT packages (`packages.yml`):
```yaml
packages:
  - package: dbt-labs/dbt_utils
    version: 1.1.1
```

### 4. Model Development

4.1. Create staging models:
- Create models under `dbt/models/staging/`
- Example: `stg_sales_orders.sql`
```sql
with source_sales_order_header as (
    select * from {{ source('adventure_works', 'SalesOrderHeader') }}
),
source_sales_order_detail as (
    select * from {{ source('adventure_works', 'SalesOrderDetail') }}
)

select
    soh.SalesOrderID,
    sod.SalesOrderDetailID as order_detail_id,
    soh.OrderDate,
    soh.DueDate,
    soh.ShipDate,
    soh.Status as order_status,
    soh.CustomerID,
    soh.SalesPersonID,
    sod.ProductID,
    sod.OrderQty,
    sod.UnitPrice,
    sod.UnitPriceDiscount,
    sod.LineTotal
from source_sales_order_header soh
left join source_sales_order_detail sod
    on soh.SalesOrderID = sod.SalesOrderID
```

4.2. Add tests in `schema.yml`:
```yaml
version: 2

models:
  - name: stg_sales_orders
    columns:
      - name: sales_order_id
        tests:
          - not_null
      - name: order_detail_id
        tests:
          - not_null
    tests:
      - dbt_utils.unique_combination_of_columns:
          combination_of_columns:
            - sales_order_id
            - order_detail_id
```

### 5. Airflow DAG Configuration

5.1. Create DBT DAG (`airflow/dags/dbt_dag.py`):
```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.providers.docker.operators.docker import DockerOperator
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'start_date': datetime(2025, 4, 13),
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=5)
}

dag = DAG(
    'dbt_transform',
    default_args=default_args,
    description='DBT transformation pipeline',
    schedule_interval=timedelta(days=1)
)

dbt_run = DockerOperator(
    task_id='dbt_run',
    image='dbt_airflow_project-dbt',
    command='dbt run',
    docker_url='unix://var/run/docker.sock',
    network_mode='bridge',
    dag=dag
)

dbt_test = DockerOperator(
    task_id='dbt_test',
    image='dbt_airflow_project-dbt',
    command='dbt test',
    docker_url='unix://var/run/docker.sock',
    network_mode='bridge',
    dag=dag
)

dbt_run >> dbt_test
```

### 6. Starting the Project

6.1. Initialize the containers:
```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

6.2. Install DBT dependencies:
```bash
docker-compose exec dbt dbt deps
```

6.3. Run DBT models:
```bash
docker-compose exec dbt dbt run
```

6.4. Test DBT models:
```bash
docker-compose exec dbt dbt test
```

### 7. Accessing Services

- Airflow UI: http://localhost:8080
  - Username: airflow
  - Password: airflow
- SQL Server:
  - Host: localhost
  - Port: 1433
  - Username: sa
  - Password: YourStrong@Passw0rd

## Why Containers?

We use containers for several important reasons:

1. **Isolation**: Each service runs in its own container, preventing conflicts between dependencies and ensuring consistent environments.

2. **Reproducibility**: Docker ensures that the development, testing, and production environments are identical.

3. **Scalability**: Containers can be easily scaled up or down based on workload requirements.

4. **Version Control**: Container configurations are version-controlled, making it easy to track changes and roll back if needed.

5. **Portability**: The project can run on any system that supports Docker, regardless of the underlying OS or infrastructure.

## Best Practices

1. **Version Control**
   - Keep all code in version control
   - Use meaningful commit messages
   - Create branches for new features

2. **Testing**
   - Write tests for all DBT models
   - Test data quality and business logic
   - Run tests before deploying changes

3. **Documentation**
   - Document all models and transformations
   - Keep README up to date
   - Use clear naming conventions

4. **Security**
   - Never commit sensitive credentials
   - Use environment variables for secrets
   - Regularly update dependencies

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and solutions:

1. **Container Connection Issues**
   - Check if all containers are running: `docker-compose ps`
   - Verify network connectivity: `docker network ls`

2. **DBT Errors**
   - Check profiles.yml configuration
   - Verify database credentials
   - Run `dbt debug` for diagnostics

3. **Airflow DAG Issues**
   - Check DAG syntax
   - Verify task dependencies
   - Check Airflow logs

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Submit a pull request

## Support

For additional support:
- Check the project issues
- Contact the development team
- Refer to DBT and Airflow documentation

Commit message:

feat: implement advanced deployment automation \n\n- Add deploy.yml workflow with Dev/Prod environments\n- Update README with deployment badges and runbook

README.md, after:

# DBT + Airflow + SQL Server DataOps Project

![DBT CI](https://github.com/baduyne/dbt-airflow-dataops/workflows/DBT%20CI%20Pipeline/badge.svg)
![Python Quality](https://github.com/baduyne/dbt-airflow-dataops/workflows/Python%20Code%20Quality/badge.svg)
![Deploy Pipeline](https://github.com/baduyne/dbt-airflow-dataops/workflows/Deploy%20Pipeline/badge.svg)


# DBT and Airflow Data Pipeline Project

## Project Overview
This project implements an automated data transformation pipeline using DBT (Data Build Tool) and Apache Airflow. The pipeline extracts data from SQL Server, transforms it using DBT models, and loads it into a target database, following modern data engineering best practices.

### Architecture Overview
```
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│  SQL Server │ ──► │    DBT     │ ──► │  Target DB  │
└─────────────┘     └─────────────┘     └─────────────┘
        ▲                  ▲                   ▲
        └──────────┬──────┴───────────┬───────┘
                   │                   │
            ┌──────┴───────┐    ┌─────┴──────┐
            │   Airflow    │    │  Docker    │
            └──────────────┘    └────────────┘
```

## Prerequisites
- Docker and Docker Compose
- Git
- Basic understanding of SQL, DBT, and Airflow
- Access to source SQL Server database

## Project Structure and Components

```
dbt_airflow_project/
├── airflow/
│   ├── dags/                  # Contains Airflow DAG definitions
│   │   └── dbt_dag.py        # DAG that orchestrates DBT transformations
│   └── logs/                  # Airflow execution logs
├── dbt/
│   ├── models/               # Contains all DBT data models
│   │   ├── staging/         # First layer: Raw data cleaning and standardization
│   │   │   ├── stg_sales_orders.sql    # Example staging model
│   │   │   └── schema.yml              # Model tests and documentation
│   │   └── marts/           # Final layer: Business-level transformations
│   ├── dbt_project.yml      # DBT project configurations
│   ├── packages.yml         # External DBT package dependencies
│   └── profiles.yml         # Database connection profiles
└── docker-compose.yml       # Container orchestration configuration
```

### Component Details

#### 1. Airflow Components
- **dags/**:
  - Purpose: Stores Airflow DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) definitions
  - Contents: Python files defining workflow orchestration
  - Key File: `dbt_dag.py` - Orchestrates the DBT transformation pipeline
  - Usage: Schedules and monitors DBT model runs and tests

- **logs/**:
  - Purpose: Contains Airflow execution logs
  - Usage: Debugging and monitoring task execution
  - Retention: Typically keeps logs for last 30 days

#### 2. DBT Components
- **models/staging/**:
  - Purpose: First layer of transformation
  - Contents: SQL models that clean and standardize raw data
  - Example: `stg_sales_orders.sql` combines and standardizes sales order tables
  - Materialization: Usually materialized as views for flexibility

- **models/marts/**:
  - Purpose: Final transformation layer
  - Contents: Business-level transformations ready for reporting
  - Materialization: Usually materialized as tables for performance
  - Usage: Direct connection to BI tools

- **dbt_project.yml**:
  - Purpose: DBT project configuration
  - Contents:
    - Project name and version
    - Model configurations
    - Materialization settings
    - Custom macro configurations

- **packages.yml**:
  - Purpose: Manages external DBT packages
  - Current Packages:
    - dbt-utils: Provides additional SQL macros and functions
  - Usage: Install packages using `dbt deps`

- **profiles.yml**:
  - Purpose: Database connection configuration
  - Contents:
    - Connection credentials
    - Target database settings
    - Environment-specific configurations

#### 3. Docker Components
- **docker-compose.yml**:
  - Purpose: Container orchestration
  - Services Defined:
    1. **airflow-webserver**: Web interface for Airflow
       - Port: 8080
       - Usage: Monitor and manage DAGs

    2. **airflow-scheduler**: Airflow task scheduler
       - Purpose: Executes DAGs based on schedule
       - Dependencies: PostgreSQL for metadata

    3. **postgres**: Airflow metadata database
       - Purpose: Stores Airflow state and history
       - Port: 5432

    4. **sqlserver**: Source database
       - Purpose: Stores raw data
       - Port: 1433
       - Database: AdventureWorks

    5. **dbt**: DBT transformation container
       - Purpose: Executes DBT commands
       - Mounts: ./dbt directory for access to models

### Removed Components
The following components from the original structure were removed as they weren't essential:
- `dbt/tests/` - Tests are now included in schema.yml files
- `dbt/macros/` - Using standard macros from dbt_utils package
- `dbt/intermediate/` - Using two-layer (staging/marts) architecture
- `docker/airflow/` and `docker/dbt/` - Docker configurations included in main docker-compose.yml

## Container Workflow
1. **Data Flow**:
   ```
   SQL Server (source) → DBT (transformation) → SQL Server (transformed)
   ```

2. **Process Flow**:
   ```
   Airflow Scheduler → Triggers DBT Container → Runs Models → Updates Status
   ```

3. **Monitoring Flow**:
   ```
   Airflow UI → View Logs → Check Task Status → Monitor Transformations
   ```

## Step-by-Step Implementation Guide

### 1. Initial Setup

1.1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd dbt_airflow_project
```

1.2. Create necessary directories:
```bash
mkdir -p airflow/dags airflow/logs dbt/models/{staging,intermediate,marts}
```

### 2. Docker Configuration

2.1. Create `docker-compose.yml` with the following services:
- Airflow Webserver
- Airflow Scheduler
- PostgreSQL (Airflow metadata database)
- SQL Server (Source database)
- DBT container

2.2. Build custom Docker images:
```bash
docker-compose build
```

### 3. DBT Configuration

3.1. Configure DBT project (`dbt_project.yml`):
```yaml
name: 'dbt_sqlserver_project'
version: '1.0.0'
config-version: 2
profile: 'default'

model-paths: ["models"]
test-paths: ["tests"]
macro-paths: ["macros"]

target-path: "target"
clean-targets:
    - "target"
    - "dbt_packages"
    - "logs"

models:
  dbt_sqlserver_project:
    staging:
      materialized: view
    intermediate:
      materialized: table
    marts:
      materialized: table
```

3.2. Configure DBT profiles (`profiles.yml`):
```yaml
default:
  target: dev
  outputs:
    dev:
      type: sqlserver
      driver: 'ODBC Driver 17 for SQL Server'
      server: sqlserver
      port: 1433
      database: AdventureWorks
      schema: dbo
      user: sa
      password: YourStrong@Passw0rd
      threads: 4
```

3.3. Install DBT packages (`packages.yml`):
```yaml
packages:
  - package: dbt-labs/dbt_utils
    version: 1.1.1
```

### 4. Model Development

4.1. Create staging models:
- Create models under `dbt/models/staging/`
- Example: `stg_sales_orders.sql`
```sql
with source_sales_order_header as (
    select * from {{ source('adventure_works', 'SalesOrderHeader') }}
),
source_sales_order_detail as (
    select * from {{ source('adventure_works', 'SalesOrderDetail') }}
)

select
    soh.SalesOrderID,
    sod.SalesOrderDetailID as order_detail_id,
    soh.OrderDate,
    soh.DueDate,
    soh.ShipDate,
    soh.Status as order_status,
    soh.CustomerID,
    soh.SalesPersonID,
    sod.ProductID,
    sod.OrderQty,
    sod.UnitPrice,
    sod.UnitPriceDiscount,
    sod.LineTotal
from source_sales_order_header soh
left join source_sales_order_detail sod
    on soh.SalesOrderID = sod.SalesOrderID
```

4.2. Add tests in `schema.yml`:
```yaml
version: 2

models:
  - name: stg_sales_orders
    columns:
      - name: sales_order_id
        tests:
          - not_null
      - name: order_detail_id
        tests:
          - not_null
    tests:
      - dbt_utils.unique_combination_of_columns:
          combination_of_columns:
            - sales_order_id
            - order_detail_id
```

### 5. Airflow DAG Configuration

5.1. Create DBT DAG (`airflow/dags/dbt_dag.py`):
```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.providers.docker.operators.docker import DockerOperator
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'start_date': datetime(2025, 4, 13),
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=5)
}

dag = DAG(
    'dbt_transform',
    default_args=default_args,
    description='DBT transformation pipeline',
    schedule_interval=timedelta(days=1)
)

dbt_run = DockerOperator(
    task_id='dbt_run',
    image='dbt_airflow_project-dbt',
    command='dbt run',
    docker_url='unix://var/run/docker.sock',
    network_mode='bridge',
    dag=dag
)

dbt_test = DockerOperator(
    task_id='dbt_test',
    image='dbt_airflow_project-dbt',
    command='dbt test',
    docker_url='unix://var/run/docker.sock',
    network_mode='bridge',
    dag=dag
)

dbt_run >> dbt_test
```

### 6. Starting the Project

6.1. Initialize the containers:
```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

6.2. Install DBT dependencies:
```bash
docker-compose exec dbt dbt deps
```

6.3. Run DBT models:
```bash
docker-compose exec dbt dbt run
```

6.4. Test DBT models:
```bash
docker-compose exec dbt dbt test
```

### 7. Accessing Services

- Airflow UI: http://localhost:8080
  - Username: airflow
  - Password: airflow
- SQL Server:
  - Host: localhost
  - Port: 1433
  - Username: sa
  - Password: YourStrong@Passw0rd

## Why Containers?

We use containers for several important reasons:

1. **Isolation**: Each service runs in its own container, preventing conflicts between dependencies and ensuring consistent environments.

2. **Reproducibility**: Docker ensures that the development, testing, and production environments are identical.

3. **Scalability**: Containers can be easily scaled up or down based on workload requirements.

4. **Version Control**: Container configurations are version-controlled, making it easy to track changes and roll back if needed.

5. **Portability**: The project can run on any system that supports Docker, regardless of the underlying OS or infrastructure.

## Best Practices

1. **Version Control**
   - Keep all code in version control
   - Use meaningful commit messages
   - Create branches for new features

2. **Testing**
   - Write tests for all DBT models
   - Test data quality and business logic
   - Run tests before deploying changes

3. **Documentation**
   - Document all models and transformations
   - Keep README up to date
   - Use clear naming conventions

4. **Security**
   - Never commit sensitive credentials
   - Use environment variables for secrets
   - Regularly update dependencies

## Deployment Runbook

### Environment Strategy
- **Development (Dev)**:
  - Trigger: Push to `develop` branch.
  - Action: Deploys changes to the development schema/database.
  - Verification: Runs all tests against the dev environment.

- **Production (Prod)**:
  - Trigger: Push to `main` branch.
  - Action: Deploys changes to the production schema/database.
  - Backup: Critical for production data integrity.
  - Verification: rigorous testing post-deployment.

### Rollback Procedures
In case of a deployment failure in Production:
1. **Automated Rollback**: The system detects failure in the `deploy` job and triggers the `rollback` job.
   - This job simulates reverting to the last known stable state.
2. **Manual Rollback**:
   - Revert the git commit that caused the failure: `git revert <commit-hash>`
   - Push the revert to `main`.
   - The deployment pipeline will run again with the reverted code, restoring the system.

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and solutions:

1. **Container Connection Issues**
   - Check if all containers are running: `docker-compose ps`
   - Verify network connectivity: `docker network ls`

2. **DBT Errors**
   - Check profiles.yml configuration
   - Verify database credentials
   - Run `dbt debug` for diagnostics

3. **Airflow DAG Issues**
   - Check DAG syntax
   - Verify task dependencies
   - Check Airflow logs

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Submit a pull request

## Support

For additional support:
- Check the project issues
- Contact the development team
- Refer to DBT and Airflow documentation
